This is an interview with General K. Hazell,
H-A-L-S-E-L-L. Today's date is the 17th of
September, 1981. This is Terry Anderson. This is a
test.
Let's start off. This is an interview with greater
General Okay, also, and today is the 17th of
September 1981. Let's talk about your parents
first. Let's start with your family background.
Can you tell us about that? Well, my father and
mother, who both died at the age of 82, my father was
originally born in Bowling Green, Kentucky, and
came to protecting Waco in a covered wagon. Do you
remember approximately when that was? Before the
turn of the century. It was, I'm sure, a very young
man. Very
young. My mother was born in Jefferson,
Texas, and we courted and met her in Waco.
I have a sister who is deceased. That was the extent
of my immediate family. What did your father do for
occupation? For many, many years, he was in the
printing business. As a young man, he started out
as a plucky with Hill Printing Company in Waco. In
fact, I had and I cannot find them. an annual that he
printed of Texas A&M
and
TCU when it was at Waco in 1903.
Then he continued in the printing business. I was
born in Dallas, Texas. October the 17th, 1913, 30
days from now. Within six months of my birth, we
moved to Kansas City, Missouri, where he was
branch manager of a very old and very fine firm
that's still in business with home office in
Chicago called Barnhart Brothers in Spindler. Is
that printing also? As a matter of fact, printing
and presses, type,
those things. And then we returned to Dallas,
where he was branch manager of a firm that's no
longer in business, known as Millersaw Trimmer
Company. They make feeders, envelope cutters.
They sold type. That's things like that. As a
matter of fact, the leading printing firm in Bryan
at that time was known as Wallace Printing
Company. There is still a Wallace Printing
Company, but it's the widow of one of the sons. And
my father was a very good friend of Marvin Wallace,
the owner, because he used to call on us to travel.
In 1922, he was at a convention
in
Cleveland when he got a wire from his brother,
Kate, also, asking him if he'd have a chance to buy a
Dodge automobile business in Bryan, Texas. Are
you interested? And he said, I wired back two
words, hell yes. And that's how we came to Bryan.
and then and then uh he was a half partner with with
your with his brother his brother in the
automotive that's right i was named after my uncle
yeah it's very confusing because i've gone as and
been known as chaos second all my life yet when i
needed to tell me about
your mother
she was raised in waco her she was Her mother was
with her when she
was one year old. She was raised there, and that's
when she met Dad. And she was a housewife
all of her life.
Let's make sure that we're... What kind of man was
your father? Can you sort of describe him? He was
about Five feet, seven inches tall, extremely
wonderful personality.
He was a tremendous salesman.
If you'd like a story that he's told me that I
thought was very good, went to a new town called
Clovis, New Mexico. And the man had set up a
printing
firm. And he went in to see him and just solicited
his printing business. And he said, I've already
made up my mind what I'm going to buy and who I'm
going to buy it from. And Dad said, thank God this is
a free country. But he said, since you have already
made up your mind, would you object if I looked
at the list? And he said, no, not at all. And he said,
well, I see that you're going to set up three
alleys, by which he meant three printing alleys
where the man said, yes. He said, how did you know
that? He said, well, you've ordered to. type
number six point number eight point about like
three a's or three b's three c's which indicate to
me she wanted three alleys where three printers
could work all at the same time without
interfering with each other he said yes that's
right and dad said well you may not be aware but i can
sell you type by the lug guarantee the letter count
and save you a ton of money and he said i had no idea
So he's a tremendous salesman. What else about
him?
Was he active in the community? Yes. In his earlier
years, of course, he had a bad automobile accident
in 1931.
broke his jaw,
and they were unable to find in those days, by
limited x-rays, exactly where it was broken. And
it appeared that he was not getting well, even to
the extent of giving me a lift at the ball barracks.
And finally, the dentist and the doctor combined
x-rays and x-rays and found the break.
And he sold out his interest in the business in the
30s to his brother. Why did he do that? Oh, it was, I
think, difficult for two people to make a good
living out of the same business. And he had some
rent property at the time. It was up in the years, so
he was getting retired.
How about your mother? What kind of person was she?
She was a very loving person, and a very insecure
person.
To understand that, you need to have known my
grandmother.
possibly the 132nd or 164th Indian back then.
But
my mother's father died when she was one year old.
And my grandma
made my mother believe that if my grandmother
didn't work, my mother would starve to death. And I
think she kind of had a syndrome like they received
bills. No matter how much money she had in the bank,
she always wanted to where the next bill was coming
from. But she was a fine, fine person, a very loving
person. Who was the authority in the household? My
father. So that's pretty much a traditional type
family. Yes. Was religion at all important?
More so with my mother than my father. We went, at
least I went to Sunday
school regularly. Mother and dad went
infrequently.
I went through all the usual things. I belonged to
the Episcopal Church and was an altar boy and all
of those things. It was... a factor, perhaps not a
real strong factor,
but nevertheless it was there. More so on my
mother's side.
Now you eventually became a general, which is a
position of leadership. In what way do you think
that your parents were responsible
for that? That's Real difficult to say. I know my
father was afraid of no man. Even when his jaw was
broken, somebody said something one day to him,
and he said, there's a chip on my shoulder. Would
you like to try to knock it off? He was not afraid to
say anything that he felt like. I'll give you an
example. My former partner, Obie Donahue, was a
salesman for Dad
earlier.
And he said that year that Dodge trucks were the
sorries that you ever laid your eyes on. And he said
a factory truck man came down and he said we called
on everybody that was even thinking about buying a
truck. And the answer was no. And he said, on the way
back, I told the man that he's just going to have to
start building a better truck if he wants to sell
something.
So when they got back, the man went in to Dad and
said, I want you to fire that salesman. And Dad
said, where's your money? He said, what do you
mean, where's my money? Well, he said, if you're
going to tell me how to run my business, it looks
like you ought to have an investment in it. He says,
you sound like you'd like some contract cases. He
said, it's in the safe. Do you want me to get it out?
He said, the man there ran
it. He was good with people, but he was wrong. But in
the early years... I never saw my father except
when he came in on the train on Friday night or
Saturday morning and left Sunday night because he
traveled by train.
So my discipline was an ivory back hairbrush from
my mother. And then I did bad the time Dad got home.
How
much education
did your parents have? Not very much. My father
always remarked that he would love to have gone
farther, but in the seventh grade
he said he was minding his own business.
boy behind him threw a spitball
and the teacher came up for the ruler and whacked
him across the shoulder and he said i closed my book
and hit her in the face and he said my last day of
school was a superintendent and i was the
principal in the classroom and i was running
around throwing chalk at him as i went around got
the door and went out and He always regretted
that he never had more education. But in those
days, seventh grade education was fairly good.
Let me check the call. OK, let's talk about your
education. All right. I entered Texas A&M. Let's
start before Texas A&M. Let's start with your
early education.
I went to kindergarten in Dallas, Texas. We lived
in the Oak Cliff section, which is now all colored.
I attended the first grade and second grade of
Winnetka Elementary School, and I had started in
the third grade,
and we moved to Bryan about
seven or eight days before my ninth birthday. And I
entered the Bryan school system in third grade.
And I went through elementary
school and high school all in the same building,
which is now known as Fenton School. In those days,
we had through the seventh grade was elementary
school, and high school was eighth, ninth, 10th,
and 11th. And I graduated in 1931. What were your
favorite
subjects? English, history.
I had some particularly excellent teachers.
I can still almost to this day diagram a sentence
which was purely from high school, not from
university
education. We had some excellent teachers. Were
you in any sports or activities? Football and
basketball. And then I went out for track by virtue
of the fact that that was a way to escape physical
education classes. Why did you want to escape
those? Usually young men like those classes.
Well, I just thought I'd give track for it. I think I
had the record of running the mile in the longest
time of anybody in the state. I just
went out to keep. I played football and
basketball. I wasn't very good at either sport.
Did you consider yourself popular in high school?
Did you have a lot of friends? Yes. There was not a
whole lot of people in my high school. We had then,
which is Boyd Elementary School. I'm not sure what
it was called then, but that was the west side. And
where we went to Bryan High School, which is
currently Bannon, was the east side. And we used to
have football games on the courthouse lawn.
So many of my classmates are dead now. Retired
Judge Johnny M. Barron was a classmate. He came
over from the west side because his family was
dead.
One of them in California named Charles Ferguson.
Charles and a man by the name of Sheik Wilcox
and I were all
the time running around together. We didn't have
as many clubs. was in the debating team. We didn't
really have a lot
of clubs. It was fairly primitive back in those
days. I lived on
what is now Texas Avenue. It was in College Avenue,
across from about where Midway Transmission is.
In fact, I think that Sonic Drive-in is where my
home was. And, of course, I walked home to lunch and
walked back to school because it was only a matter
of four or five blocks. But nearly all of my
classmates did. Did you have any firm aims when you
graduated from high school, or did you have any
idea what you wanted to be or do in the future? It was
in the real height of the Depression. Of course,
the crash came in 29, the after effect. In fact, my
dad had to take on Kelvinator refrigerators just
to keep the doors
open. I had no idea what I wanted to do,
if there were any testing facilities.
They weren't known to me. So dad suggested that I
take engineering. I said, well, that's all right.
He said, why not electrical
engineering? I said, OK, that's all right, which
is not what I wanted to do at all. And I took
electrical engineering for 2 and 1 half years. We
got into polyphase lap wound motors, and I
transferred to mechanical
engineering. Remember, again, it was hard, hard
times. Electrical engineers and mechanical
engineers were graduating and getting jobs in
filling stations.
My last year, I switched to agricultural
engineering, who were getting more jobs than
anybody else, and spent an extra year. And I
graduated in 1936 with a degree in agricultural
engineering. Did you ever consider any other
university or college besides A&M?
I just would like to, but
I was not able to afford it. I'm not near one of my
parents. Although, believe it or not, for four
years I lived in a dormitory
there, even though my home was divided. Why was
that? In those days, the lowest form of campus
existence, and we had branches in the military,
the lowest form of existence was a day student in
the signal
corps. You didn't want to be a day student. So I
lived in Denver for four years. I lived at home. Why
Stanford? Why were you interested in Stanford? It
was an excellent university, and if I was going to
study engineering, I felt like they had one of the
top engineering schools in the United States.
Back in those days— Were you eager to get out of
Bryan College Station? Were you eager to leave
Texas to see something else? Maybe, maybe to a
degree. I don't know. I just—maybe
it was— figment of imagination to dream
something. That's the only other place I ever even
thought of. Did the Depression, the Depression
sounds like it had an economic impact on your
family. Did it have a political impact? I mean, was
your family a Roosevelt supporter or? I, probably
they were. I'm not sure I was too interested in
politics. In those days, You didn't get to vote
until you were 21. I remember we also paid a poll tax
in Texas. Except on my 21st birthday, I went down to
the courthouse and got my certificate of
eligibility to vote, and that was free.
I'm not sure I, as a lot of students, were doing it in
politics. I was pretty well wrapped up. going
to school. Did your family ever accept any federal
support during the Great Depression, or did
anybody ever apply on a job? To my knowledge, there
was no federal support. Oh, the CCCs, I'm talking
about. No. A very close friend
of mine was in the CCCs, a current close friend. But
no, I went to A&M. Then they, I can't remember what
year, possibly 32 or 33, they came out with what we
call the AAA, the Agricultural Adjustment
Act. And one summer I worked from, went to school
from 10 in the morning to 4 in the afternoon, worked
from 4 in the afternoon to 12 at night. The summer
before, I surveyed acreage in the bottom.
Most
of those people I already knew. I walked many a mile
around the fields. But that job was funded by the
government? That's right. It paid me $3 a day. I
worked seven days a week. Finally worked up a
supervisor, $4 a day, and they stopped the
program.
What political persuasion was your family?
Democratic. Yeah, everybody's Democratic in
Texas. At that time, were they conservatives,
moderates, liberals? Terry, I'm not sure.
Probably conservative.
Our political system in Bryan, we had a man, and he
was a friend of Dad's, and he later became a rather
good friend of mine. He was an attorney named Law
Henderson. And I think Henderson Elementary
School was named after him. He was attorney for the
city of Bryan, and he was attorney for Bryan
Building and Home. And he was the, I would say, the
political czar of Brazos County. Nobody ran for
office and got elected without his approval. And
yet he was a fine person. And I used to kid him
because he smoked cigars for many years, and he
quit. He kept one stuck in his mouth. And I used to
kid him. I said, Mr. Law, you're the only man I know
with an unlighted chew of the back of
your mouth. But I liked him very much. But he was a
powerful
politician. And what political persuasion are
you following? I'm a conservative, very
conservative
Democrat. Very conservative. Now, when you went
to A&M, did you ever consider the military aspect
of A&M? Was that at all important? Or was it
basically because of the engineering? Yes, I
think so. I think so. Of course, in those days, The
only people that were not in the Corps were either
athletes or
physically unqualified. So it was just a matter of
course going to the Corps. Of course, you
remember- Did that draw you, or did you have any
feelings about being in the Corps or not being in
the Corps? I just assumed that was part of it. As a
matter of fact, I was in the registration line, and
the seniors from the various outfits were there.
And
one of them said, what outfit are you going to get
in? I said, I don't know. He said, well, get in the
Calvary. I said, all right.
So farther down the line, there was another
senior, and he said, What outfit you gonna get in? I
said, the Calvary, I guess. He said, what course
you gonna take? I said, electrical engineering.
He said, man, the Calvary hadn't graduated
electrical engineering in 30 years. I said, what
do you represent? He said, Battery A, field
artillery. I said, all right, I'll get the Battery
A. The next senior that came along was Battery C,
field artillery, and he happened to be the last one
I ran into, so I was in Battery C, field artillery.
Did you ever consider applying to one of the
service academies?
I thought about it, but not
probably real rigorously.
But I took to the military. What did you like about
being on the Corps? Cam ready, friendship. I had a
ball as a freshman. In those days, we'd cut our hair
short. We had a white stripe around our cup. Do they
still have that? No. A freshman had many
privileges you might not be aware of. For example?
We could cut in on a senior to dance. say, pardon me,
sir, but I'd like to thank this lady. Or we could
walk up to any
guest young lady on campus and introduce her. I'm
Fish Austin. She better meet you. That a ball,
really. Of course, those days we had
boards. Yeah. Tell me about the hazing. Well, I
went out for freshman football. Mind you, I
would... What, 145, 150 pounds. And I
was a center and linebacker in high school. I ended
up as a third string quarterback, which is meat
grinding.
And we had what was known then as a frog. You ever
hear of a frog?
A frog was an individual that started mid-term. So
he had to play freshman football the following
year. He wasn't a fish, he was a frog. And they'd
open up a line, and I'd dash through it, and there's
a big old boy, and he'd pick me up, flap me like that,
and the ball would go that way, and the helmet that
way.
How long did you last play football? I played
through the whole year. On the third string, of
course, that was way down the line. That was, well,
I'd say it was a cannon fodder. But I enjoyed it. Did
you play any after that? No, only intramural. I
played
intramural. And intramural softball. And your
work? Work was primarily in the summertime. But
not during the school year?
No. And yet you still had enough money to be able to
live on campus and not work during the school year
during the Depression? That's right. That was my
mother and father's time. But
money went a long way, you see. Oh, yeah. Money went
a long way. And I guess the room and board at the
university college at that time was about as cheap
as living at home. Did you see any purpose in the
hazing?
Yes. What was it? Of course, it varied among
outfits. In our
battery,
Only the sophomores hazed the freshmen. The
juniors and seniors could. And in some instances,
they did. But we had some unwritten rules.
A sophomore or a junior could only call for a
specific freshman to run an errand. A senior could
holler freshman, and all of them would scurry.
That first year in A&M,
we had room inspections every Saturday morning.
And I cleaned up for the battery commander and his
roommate, and for the first sergeant and his
roommate. Remember, we had very few freshmen. I
think the total enrollment In 1931, total
enrollment
was around 0.5.
And the battery commander was left-handed. And
you had to assume a certain position with the
testicle, handle of the testicle. And then
the battery commander would strike me three or
four times with the board, and then his roommate,
who was right-handed, and they didn't want to know
which hit the hardest. And then I had to be very
delicate about how the techniques were different
and so forth, because obviously the one that you
said hit the hardest doesn't have to prove
anything wrong. And the first sergeant, who was
commonly a junior in his roommates, I would work
Friday afternoon mopping the floor and cleaning
it up. Come in Saturday morning to make the last
touch and they'd been eating pecans and they were
all over the floor. And then I found out that they
didn't inspect the first sergeant's room. So it
made it a whole lot easier. But it was, hazing was
kind of a way of life. It wasn't done in brutality
really. it was done to see a lot of people come out of
high school big man on campus and all of that one of
the things that we did i don't know whether i was
smart enough but i was lucky enough every unit that
started school each company about first sergeant
would make an announcement Due to the shortage of
non-commissioned officers, there were
vacancies, and anybody that would like to apply
for those vacancies, please step forward. So some
freshmen stepped forward, and they were
appointed everything from master sergeant to
corporal. But they were on a probationary period,
and they had to wear their stripes upside down.
Well, they made the announcements on the PA system
Sabisa Hall, big man on campus till the day of
wreck.
It was all a part of the tradition of bringing you
into discipline. So you thought that Hastings was
part of the purpose of this tradition and
discipline? I think so. Are you sorry to see it go?
It's about the only thing they have today on
campus. No, not really. This is a different time,
different time frame. I'm hard pressed to advise
my son in many instances because the times are
different. Communication is instant like that.
things that occurred 30 minutes ago we were aware
of. Not in those days. It's just a whole different
ballgame. I think hazing had its place at that
time. I do not think it does now. Was there anything
that you disliked about being on the Corps? I can't
think of a thing. I marched the mill three times a
day. Many a time we had to steal food to bring it to a
senior. Even though we had a regular army mat to
start and stand at the door, it was quite a
challenge.
I loved it, really. Had a ball.
Did you ever assume a position of leadership in the
Corps? I was slated to be first sergeant of Battery
City. And I failed to qualify as a junior. Poor
grades. And the sergeant major down in the
commandant's office, I'd go down there, and he
says, there's Kay Hawson, the guy with his
military future behind
you. So I became a file closer to my junior year and
my senior. And in my fifth year,
I became
a second lieutenant. When I came back, it was
qualified. Let's talk about the ways in which
being in the Corps helped you in your military
career. Things we did were practical. To give you
an example, if I may move forward a while. In 1941, I
was a volunteer in practice duty and went to Fort
Ord, California and was sent to a school of 7th
Division artillery. Then we went to
Camp Roberts, California, which was an IRTC,
Infra-Replacement Training Center, in the West
Garrison. In the East Garrison, which was
designed for an artillery brigade, we went there
to form
the 26th Field Artillery Brigade.
We had In our regiment, 70 officers, of which 40
were regular army, and 30 were reserve. Many of
them of which were up and down the California
coast, San Jose State, Stanford, and various
places
around. They were unable to move a body of men. They
were unable to properly salute. They really were.
That was old stuff to me. In other words, the way it
helped you was preparation. That's right.
Because, see, we were horse-drawn artillery. And
I liked horses. And we had some fine stable
sergeants and army sergeants, regular army down
there. And freshmen either rode the caisson. You
know what a caisson is? a two-wheel vehicle that
pulls the gun.
Or he rides
the first team. And then generally, sophomores
ride the swing team or the lead
team. There'll be three horses. And you rode on the
left side or the near horse, and you had a horse on
the other side, the off horse. As a sophomore, I was
a lead team driver.
And I had an off horse by the name of Santa Claus, I
believe. The only time he ever, the only way he ever
went out of the gun park was on his hind legs. So I had
a barrel. Is there any way you think that being in
the Corps ever hurt your advancement, hindered in
any way your career in the military? No. I'd say it
absolutely enhanced it. Has it prepared you much
better than the average ROTC person? Yes. On the
West Coast, they wore the uniform on drill day.
And we lived it. We marched to meals three times a
day in formation. We had parades and reviews.
It was just a way of life. But we differed in one way
with our
military staff.
A few of them that were
over-anxious, I guess the wording is. We'd call
our dormitories barracks. And every so often as
they, those over-ambitious would pass by, they
accidentally got wet out of the window.
And they didn't know who did it. We harassed them.
But we had a, you know, a closeness of spirit. We had
a Well, it was the Democrats and Republicans.
Artillery wore red hat cards on their hats.
Infantry wore blue. We used to have elections they
called hat card elections.
But the Corps was really a close-knit out. Do you
think that being in the Corps had any impact on you
eventually becoming a general?
I can't see how it would help.
You
did not become an officer until you were a senior.
You did not become a sergeant until you were a
classified junior. I became, I think, a corporal
when I was a sophomore.
Some institutions you can become a sergeant and a
sophomore and so forth.
We had what we called tactical officers. Let's
talk about some of these. These are professional
soldiers. What impact did they have on you? Quite a
bit. When I was a freshman, I had a very fine and
gentle soul by the name of Captain Tom Harris. And
of course, remember that the Army had no money in
those days. Captain Harry told me one day, he said,
well, I see where old General so-and-so died. I
went up one notch on the promotion list. And in what
we call military science class, or we call
bulletics, we were talking about the then gun, the
French 75.